Desktop e-book: Chapter 1 (#17299)
dotnet/docs: docs/architecture/modernize-desktop/why-modern-desktop-applications.md

1. Move Desktop Application scenarios into Modern Application platform. The traditional desktop development is still very popular because it addresses certain scenarios really well. It makes sense to take these common desktop scenarios and bring them into the modern desktop platform to make the platform fully capable.

    ![Move Desktop Application scenarios into Modern Application platform](./media/why-modern-desktop-applications/desktop-to-modern.png)

1. Move Modern Application features into Desktop Applications. For existing desktop apps that need a way to leverage modern capabilities without rewriting from scratch, features from the Modern Application platform are pushed into the Desktop Application.

    ![Move Modern Application features into Desktop Applications](./media/why-modern-desktop-applications/modern-to-desktop.png)

In this book we will focus on the second part and show how you can modernize your existing desktop applications.

## Paths to modernization

The structure of this guide reflects three different axes to accomplish modernization: Modern Features, Deployment and Installation.

### Modern Features

> Say you have a working Windows Forms application that a sales representative of your company uses to fill in a customer order. A new requirement comes in to enable the customer to sign-in the order using a tablet pen. Inking is native in today´s operating systems and technologies but was not available when the app was developed.

Reviewer: sign in the order doesn't make much sense. Did you mean to just sign the order?

```suggestion
Say you have a working Windows Forms application that a sales representative of your company uses to fill in a customer order. A new requirement comes in to enable the customer to sign the order using a tablet pen. Inking is native in today´s operating systems and technologies, but it wasn't available when the app was developed.
```

### Your story

You might find yourself in the same boat, where you have mature Windows Forms or Windows Presentation Foundation (WPF) applications that have proved their reliability over the years. You probably want to keep using these applications for many more years. At the same time, since those applications were written some time ago, they might be missing capabilities like modern look, performance, integration with new devices and platform features, and so on, which gives them a feel of "old tech". There's another problem that might concern you as a developer. While working on the older .NET Framework versions and maintaining applications that were written a while ago, you might feel like you aren't learning new technologies and missing on building modern technical skills. If that is your story – this book is for you!

### About this guide

> This guide is about strategies you can adopt to move your existing desktop applications through the path of modernization and incorporate the latest runtime, language, and platform features. You'll discover that there is no unique recipe as each application is different, and so are your requirements and preferences. The good news is that there are common approaches you can apply to add new features and capabilities to your applications. Some of them won't even require major modifications of your code. In this book, we'll reveal how all those features work behind the scenes and explain the mechanics of their implementations. Moreover, you'll find some common scenarios for modernizing existing desktop applications shown in detail so you can find inspiration for evolving your projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide is about strategies you can adopt to move your existing desktop applications through the path of modernization and incorporate the latest runtime, language, and platform features. You'll discover that there's no unique recipe as each application is different, and so are your requirements and preferences. The good news is that there are common approaches you can apply to add new features and capabilities to your applications. Some of them won't even require major modifications of your code. In this book, we'll reveal how all those features work behind the scenes and explain the mechanics of their implementations. Moreover, you'll find some common scenarios for modernizing existing desktop applications shown in detail so you can find inspiration for evolving your projects.
```

Here are some reasons for choosing desktop applications in your development:

- Desktop apps have better interaction with user's PC.
- The performance of desktop applications for complex calculations is much higher than performance of web applications.
- Running custom logic on the client side is possible but much harder with a web application.
- Using multithreading is easier and more efficient in a desktop application.
- The learning curve for designing user interfaces (UIs) isn't steep. And for WinForms, it's completely intuitive with drag-and-drop experience of the Windows Forms designer.
- It's easy to start coding and testing your algorithms without the need to set up a server infrastructure or to care about connectivity problems, firewalls, and browser compatibility.
- Debugging is powerful as compared to web debugging.
- Access to hardware devices, such as camera, Bluetooth, or card readers, is easy.

> - Since the technology has been around for a while, there's a large number of experts and a knowledge base available to develop desktop applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Since the technology has been around for a while, there are many experts and a knowledge base available to develop desktop applications.
```

The following list summarizes the main characteristics of Windows Forms:

- Mature technology with lots of code samples and documentation.
- Powerful and productive designer. Not so convenient to design UI "from code".
- Easy and intuitive to learn, thanks to the designer's drag-and-drop experience.
- Supported on any Windows version.
- Supported on .NET Core 3.0.

### WPF

Based on the XAML language specification, WPF favors a clear separation between UI and code. XAML offers such capabilities like templating, styling, and binding, which is suited for building large applications. Like Windows Forms, it's a managed framework, but the design is modular and reusable.

Here are the main features of WPF:

- Mature technology.
- Designer is available, but developers usually prefer to create the design from code using declarative XAML.
- The learning curve is steeper than Windows Forms.
- Supported on any Windows version.
- Supported on .NET Core 3.0.

### UWP

> UWP isn't only a presentation framework like WPF and Windows Forms, but it's also a platform itself. This platform has its own API set (the Windows Runtime API), a new deployment system (MSIX), a modern application lifecycle model (for low battery consumption), a new Resource Management System (based on PRI files), among other things. The platform was created to support all kind of input systems (like ink, touch, gamepad, mouse, keyboard, gaze, and so on) in all form-factors with performance and low battery consumption in mind. For these reasons, the shell of the Windows 10 OS uses parts of the UWP platform.

Reviewer: Long sentences don't translate well. How about this?

```suggestion
UWP isn't only a presentation framework like WPF and Windows Forms, but it's also a platform itself. This platform has:

- Its own API set (the Windows Runtime API).
- A new deployment system (MSIX)
- A modern application lifecycle model (for low battery consumption).
- A new Resource Management System (based on PRI files). 
 
The platform was created to support all kind of input systems (like ink, touch, gamepad, mouse, keyboard, gaze, and so on) in all form-factors with performance and low battery consumption in mind. For these reasons, the shell of the Windows 10 OS uses parts of the UWP platform.
```

With the launch of .NET Core 3.0, you can leverage a new approach of deploying multiple versions of .NET Core side by side and specifying which version of .NET Core each application should target. This way, you can use newest features in one application while being confident you aren't going to break any other applications.

### Installation

Desktop applications always rely on some sort of installation process before the user can start using them. This fact brought into the game a set of technologies, from MSI and ClickOnce to custom installers or even XCOPY deployment. Any of these methods deals with delicate problems because applications need a way to access shared resources on the machine. Sometimes installation needs to access the Registry to insert or update new Key Values, sometimes to update shared DLLs referenced by the main application. This causes a continuous headache for users, creating this perception that once you install some application, your computer will never be the same, even if you uninstall it afterwards.

> In this book, we'll introduce a new way of installing applications with MSIX that solves the problem described earlier. You'll learn how you can easy set up a packaging, installation, and updates for your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this book, we'll introduce a new way of installing applications with MSIX that solves the problem described earlier. You'll learn how you can easily set up a packaging, installation, and updates for your application.
```
